P6503: Introduction to Health Economics
CLASS SESSIONS
Wednesday, 5:30pm to 8:20pm
Location: Hammer Health Sciences Building  (701 W 168th St, 4th floor, Room 401) 
First meeting: January 21, 2026
Last meeting: April 29, 2026 
No class on March 18th (Spring Break) 
Final Exam: May 6th, 2026 
INSTRUCTOR
Nada Boualam, PhD 
Adjunct Professor, Department of Health Policy and Management
Email: nb2605@cumc.columbia.edu
Office Hours: Wednesdays before or after class in person, or by appointment over Zoom. 
TEACHING ASSISTANTS (TAs)
Julia Lisboa, jal2358@cumc.columbia.edu
Office hours: Tuesday 11:45 am - 12:45 pm; Teams (Link) 
Salome (Sally) Margalitachvili, sm5787@cumc.columbia.edu
Office hours: Tuesday 11:45 am - 12:45 pm; In-person ARB 492
Devon Park, dap2189@cumc.columbia.edu
Office hours: Sunday 6:00 pm - 7:00 pm; Teams (Link)
Your lead TAs are as follows: 
If your last name starts with A-H, your lead TA is Julia
If your last name starts with I-P, your lead TA is Salome (Sally) 
If your last name starts with R-Z, your lead TA is Devon 
COURSE DESCRIPTION
The purpose of this course is to help you grasp important microeconomic principles and how they can be utilized to better understand market behavior and dynamics, underlying incentives, and public programs and policies in the healthcare sector. 
The course is divided into three sections. The first section examines core microeconomic theories and concepts, discussing them in general terms and providing specific examples of how they apply to the US health sector. The second section uses this economic framework to examine the behavior of physicians, hospitals, and pharmaceutical manufacturers in the health care market. The final section of this course will extend this framework to examine the structure, market behavior and public policies related to the private insurance industry, as well as the structure and financial/economic aspects of the Medicare and Medicaid programs. Throughout all sections, the role of the consumer and the incentives of the various stakeholders will be examined. 
PREREQUISITES 
None 
COURSE COMPETENCIES AND LEARNING OBJECTIVES
The Department of Health Policy and Management has adopted a carefully researched Competency Model to guide the design of all courses in the Management curriculum. Each course is explicitly charged with reinforcing and developing further a number of key competencies identified in the model. This course also is intended to assess and further your professional development and career readiness. The course focuses specifically on the following competencies:
●	Analytic Thinking: Breaking down problems to understand and assess basic relationships and to recognize and analyze complex relationships
●	Innovative Thinking: Using fundamental concepts to recognize patterns and develop unique responses to complex ideas
●	Performance Measurement: Using evidence-based approaches
●	Health Policy: Understanding the history and structure of the US health care system; issues of quality, access, and cost, insurance systems and provider payment methods and specifying how a variety of forces, particularly political and economic ones, have shaped the system; analyzing the main options and methods for financing health services.
These competencies are reflected and implemented throughout all activities in the course and inform the specific course learning objectives described below. Students who successfully complete this course will be better able to:
●	Understand the factors that influence the demand and supply of health care services
●	Apply the concepts of allocative efficiency, production efficiency and opportunity costs in considering the implications of increasing health care spending on societal welfare
●	Analyze and anticipate the behavior of providers, consumers, insurers and other health sector actors in response to changes in economic/financial incentives
●	Utilize tools such as cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness analysis to support health care-related decision-making
●	Assess past, present and emerging trends in health care delivery, payment systems, and public policy and understand the impacts, implications and inter-connectedness of these developments
●	Understand the dynamics within the private health insurance marketplace as well as the features and roles played by the Medicare and Medicaid programs.
●	Consider the appropriate role of government policies, regulations and programs in promoting an efficient and equitable health care system.
ASSESSMENT AND GRADING POLICY
Student grades will be based on the following components :
●	Take home problem sets: there will be 5 problem sets throughout the semester, valued at 5% each. The lowest assignment score will be dropped; we will average only the top 4 assignment scores when computing your final grade for the course. 
●	In class exams: there will be 3 exams for this course, worth 25% each. The exams will be closed book and administered using proctor on your laptop. One 8.5 x 11 sheet of notes may be used. Please bring your laptops for exam days. 
●	Attendance: Attendance and participation are required, valued at 5% of your total grade. Attendance will be taken throughout the course. Attendance policies for this course with respect to infections disease will follow the Mailman school’s policies on this topic. A copy of those policies can be found in the files section of the course’s Canvas site. 
Late Policy: Assignments will be due on Wednesday of the following week at noon. 5% of your assignment grade will be deducted for every hour that your assignment is late (this means that if the assignment is submitted between 12:01-1:00pm, 5% of your grade will be deducted and so on). No assignments will be accepted following the start of class. 
Grading 
A+               	Reserved for highly exceptional achievement.
A                 	Excellent. Outstanding achievement.
A-                	Excellent work, close to outstanding.
B+               	Very good. Solid achievement expected of most graduate students.
B                 	Good. Acceptable achievement.
B-                	Acceptable achievement, but below what is generally expected of graduate students.
C+               	Fair achievement, above minimally acceptable level.
C                 	Fair achievement, but only minimally acceptable.
C-                	Very low performance.
F                  	Failure. Course usually may not be repeated unless it is a required course.
 
Letter grades will be adjusted as necessary to comply with the HPM department’s guidelines, which are:

GRADE	% OF CLASS
A- To A+	~40-55%
B- to B+	~40-55%
C+ & Below	Remainder
 
However, in no case will this adjustment reduce your letter grade below what it would be following a traditional translation from a numeric to a letter grade [i.e., a final numeric grade of 90 or above would translate to an A- A, or A+, depending on where it would fall in the 90 to 100 range; a final numeric grade in the 80 to 89 range would convert to a B-, B, or B+, depending on where it fell in that range; a final numeric grade below 80 would convert to a C+ or below.)
Notes on Grading
If you identify an error in the grading of your work, please bring this to the TA’s attention as soon as possible so we can fix it. Aside from attempts to remedy grading errors, requests to re-grade a question on an assignment or exam may result in the re-grading of that entire assignment or exam, which may result in a lower overall score. All requests for re-grades must be made within seven days from the date that the graded assignments/exams are returned to the class. 
We are always available to help explain assignment and exam questions. If you have questions about your grade, please feel free to reach out to the TA for clarification. 
ATTENDANCE POLICY
Class: Attendance is expected and part of your grade. Attendance will be taken throughout the course. Attendance policies for this course with respect to infections disease will follow the Mailman school’s policies on this topic. A copy of those policies can be found in the files section of the course’s Canvas site. 
Exams: Exams are mandatory and must be taken at the scheduled times. The exam dates are announced well in advance, so please plan accordingly. Requests to reschedule exams will only be considered in the case of documented emergencies or other university-approved reasons.
Emergencies: If you experience a genuine emergency (e.g., illness, family emergency), contact me as soon as possible. We will work with you to make reasonable accommodations.
AI POLICY
Use of generative AI (e.g. ChatGPT) to complete assignments is permitted but strongly discouraged in this class. I expect all students to submit work that they have produced themselves, whether individually or collaboratively. You will understand the material better if you do the work yourself. This will be discussed in more detail in class. 
EMAIL POLICY
Please post questions about course materials, assignments, or exams to the Discussion page. This will allow the rest of the class to benefit from any clarification that may be given in response to the question.
Note that questions about assignments must be posted by 11:59pm eastern time the day before they are due, so be sure to read the assignments carefully well in advance of the due date.
Questions and comments about your personal circumstances should be directed to TAs and/or the professor over email. Please plan to allow up to 2 business days for a response.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
You are expected to attend all sessions and complete the required readings, which are designed to complement the material covered in the sessions. While we encourage students to discuss assignment questions with classmates, each student is responsible for drafting and submitting the answers to each assignment on their own.
COURSE MATERIALS
There will be no required textbook for the class. Readings will primarily take the form of articles drawn from academic journals in the fields of health policy, economics, and medicine, as well as the popular press, and textbook excerpts. Exam questions will be based on subjects discussed in lectures. 
You are free to choose any micro or health economics textbook to support this class if you like; here is one recommendation: 
Krugman, Paul and Wells, Robin. Microeconomics, 3rd Edition. Worth Publishers, 2013. [ISBN-13 Number: 978-1-4292-8342-7]. This is a “fun” easy-to-read text written by a Nobel Prize-winning economist – how often can you say that? Don’t buy the more expensive newer versions – the 3rd edition will be just fine (my page references in this syllabus will be to this edition). Used paperback copies are available on Amazon: https://smile.amazon.com/gp/offer-listing/1429283424/ref=sr_1_3?sprefix=krugman+micr%2Caps%2C136&crid=2DBAP0XCXJW8H&keywords=krugman+microeconomics&qid=1589829807&sr=8-3&dchild=1
There are also many excellent Health Economics textbooks available at the Health Sciences Library, which you may check out if you so choose. 
For those of you who have not taken a course in microeconomics before, many students have found the microeconomics module on the Kahn Academy website to be a helpful and straightforward reference for reviewing key concepts.
If you’re looking for a ‘backup’ or secondary source for any economics concepts with which you might be having some trouble, the (free) online textbook by CORE Econ is a good comprehensive reference.
You will see that several of the readings for this module are prepared by the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). KFF frequently puts timely, concise, well-research issue briefs describing important features of the Medicaid or important program trends or hot-button issues. If you ever find yourself working in this space (or in a provider organization or health system serving significant numbers of Medicaid recipients, their website (https:/ /www.kff.org) is a great place to go for solid info and analysis on the program.
MAILMAN SCHOOL POLICIES AND EXPECTATIONS
Students and faculty have a shared commitment to the School’s mission, values and oath.
Academic Integrity
Students are required to adhere to the Mailman School Conduct and Community Standards, which includes the Code of Academic Integrity. Columbia Mailman and Columbia University take academic integrity very seriously. This instructor and course are no different. Should any student be suspected of an academic integrity violation, there will be a report submitted to the Center for Student Success & intervention/Student Conduct. After these offices conduct their process, if a student is found responsible for violating an academic integrity policy (see Standards & Discipline/Academic Violations and Student Honor Code & Professional Guidelines), they will be assigned a grade penalty, with a possible outcome being a 0% on the assignment.
Please review the university, school, and course policies, as you are responsible for behaving according to the outlined expectations.
Personal Support
Students sometimes experience life challenges that require additional support and connection to resources. If you are experiencing difficult circumstances, please reach out for help and support. Student Support Services in the Office of Student Affairs is poised to connect with students, provide resource referrals, and provide ongoing, non-clinical support. They are a good place to start if you do not know where to turn.
If you would like to make a referral to student support, whether for yourself or someone else, the best way to do so is to fill out the form linked below, and student support will reach out directly. You may also email Meurcie Zignoli at mz3047@cumc.columbia.edu to connect to Student Support Services. Please note that this form is separate from other reporting structures in place for code of conduct violations or Title VI/ Title IX concerns. This form is also not an emergency response mechanism. In case of an emergency, please contact Public Safety at 212-305-7972: Mailman Student Support Team Referral Form (maxient.com).
Disability Services and Accommodations
I am committed to a learning environment that is inclusive of all students, including students with disabilities. You are always welcome to reach out to me or to the Office of Disability Services (ODS) to discuss academic accommodations.
In order to receive disability-related academic accommodations, students must first be registered with the Office of Disability Services (ODS). Students who have or think they may have a disability are invited to contact ODS for a confidential discussion at 212.854.2388 (V) 212.854.2378 (TTY), or by email at disability@columbia.edu. If you have already registered with ODS, please speak to your instructor to ensure that they have been notified of your recommended accommodations by Meredith Ryer (mr4075@cumc.columbia.edu), Assistant Director of Student Support and Mailman’s liaison to the Office of Disability Services.
If you have registered with ODS, I encourage you to contact me to ensure that they have notified me of their recommended accommodations.
Bias Incidents
Our community at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health is committed to creating an inclusive working, learning, and living environment where all are respected. The occurrence of bias related incidents, involving conduct, speech, or expressions reflecting prejudice are an opportunity for learning and growing as a community.
As part of our efforts to create as inclusive a community as possible, when bias incidents occur at Columbia, we provide an opportunity for those involved to engage in education, advocacy and conversation. In this way, we work to address the incident and minimize the potential for future occurrences. Our community’s tools to address bias include a reporting process and the Bias Incident Resource Team, plus resources within schools and various offices. You can access information about the Bias Reporting Process and FAQs here.
Why Reporting Matters and How to File a Report
Our priority is ensuring that Columbia University is a safe community and workplace where we can learn, live, work and express ourselves. As members of the community, we have a shared responsibility to uphold these standards and report behavior that violates these standards. The reporting options provide Columbia University community members an opportunity to share important information directly with appropriate offices. If you or a member of the community needs support please take the time to complete a report so we may provide support, care, and accountability: https://universitylife.columbia.edu/report

 
COURSE SCHEDULE
Details on each session are posted in the Modules page. Please complete the readings uploaded to the Module pages corresponding to each class. 

Week 1: Introduction to the Economics of Health Care
1/21/26	Learning Objectives:
●	Provide an overview of the course, introduction to teaching team
●	Discuss core economic concepts
●	Explore the extent to which the health care sector differs from other industries, how these differences affect the functioning of an efficient market
●	Examine selected overall system performance metrics and the opportunity cost implications of high levels of health care spending.
 
Week 2: The Demand for / Consumption of Medical Care
1/28/26	Learning Objectives:
●	Understand utility & utility maximization
●	Examine the factors that influence consumers’ demand for medical care
●	Understand elasticities and why they are important
Reading: Please see Session Module in Canvas
 Problem Set #1 Assigned 

 

Week 3: The Supply / Production of Medical Care                                                        	
2/4/26	Learning Objectives:
●	Examine the factors that influence the supply of health care services available in the marketplace
●	Understand cost functions, and how they relate to the supply of medical care
●	Understand the concepts of marginal rate of technical substitution and cost-minimizing decision-making
●	Problem Set #1 Review 
Problem Set #1 Due 
Problem Set #2 Assigned 

 Week 4:  Market Analysis
2/11/26	Learning Objectives:
●	Describe and analyze models of market structure – perfect competition, oligopoly, and monopoly markets – and introduce/discuss their relevance to the markets for different types of health care services and their implications for price levels and other aspects of market performance.
●	Introduce market power and market concentration and how they relate and describe the approaches commonly used to define relevant markets and measure the extent of market concentration.
Problem Set #2 Due

 

Week 5: Exam I 
2/18/26	Exam I will cover all material until this point 
A review session will be scheduled prior to the exam

Week 6: Hospitals 
2/24/26	Learning Objectives:
●	 Approaches to paying for hospital services
●	 Examine the shifts that occurred in the supply and utilization of hospital services in response to payment changes
●	 Understand the factors precipitating the trend toward increased concentration within hospital markets and examine research findings on the impact of increased consolidation on prices and care quality
●	Examine the variability in hospital payment levels that exist within and across hospital markets.
Reading: Please see Session Module in Canvas
Problem Set #3 Assigned 

 
Week 7: Physicians                                           	
3/04/26	Learning Objectives:
●	Supply of physicians in the US, including the distribution across specialties, employment status and income levels
●	Evolution of approaches to paying for physician services
●	 Explore the dynamic shifts that occurred in the physician practice arrangements that have occurred over time, including increased horizontal and vertical consolidation
●	Examine the findings of health services research on the impact of these organizational changes on health care utilization, prices, and quality.
Problem Set 3 Due 
Problem Set 4 Assigned 

Week 8: The Pharmaceutical Industry
3/11/26	Learning Objectives:
●	Provide an overview of the pharmaceutical industry, discussing how it is similar to and differs from the markets for other medical services.
●	Examine the issues and relationships related to innovation/research & development, prices and profits in this sector.
●	Discuss the factors, including government policies, that affect the competitiveness of the pharmaceutical market.
●	Introduce the range of players involved in pharmaceutical supply chain, with a focus on pharmaceutical benefit managers (PBMs) and the controversial role they play within that structure.
Problem Set 4 Due



Week 9: Cost-Benefit and Cost-Effectiveness Analysis                  	
3/25/26	Learning Objectives:
Understand what is meant by cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness analysis, the difference in the questions that each type of analysis can address, and the technical and conceptual issues associated with conducting such analyses to assist in health care-related decision-making.

Week 10:  In-Class Exam on Part II Material
4/1/26	This exam will cover all material up until this point in the course. It will be heavily weighted on the second part of the course, but may contain some references to the first part. 
A review session will be scheduled prior to the exam. 

Week 10: Health Insurance Part I 
4/08/26	Learning Objectives:
●	Provide a context for examining the private insurance market
●	Describe the underlying economic theory/concepts and factors related to consumer demand for health insurance, including the tax-treatment of employer sponsored health insurance
●	Describe the different markets (individual, small group, large group); how they differ from one another in terms of dynamics, regulation, etc.
●	Examine the extent of consolidation in the health insurance market
●	Describe the trends in the types of health insurance plans being sold (e.g, HMOs, PPOs, etc.) and the differences in how these different plan types are designed.
  
Week 11: Health Insurance Part II 
4/15/26	Learning Objectives:
●	Explore private health insurance markets in the pre-ACA days
●	Summarize the major ACA provisions affecting the private health insurance market
●	Examine the performance of the ACA-authorized Health Insurance Marketplaces/Exchanges with respect to reducing the number of uninsured, premium levels, and insurer participation
●	Highlight current & potential future directions for the private insurance industry.
Problem set 5 assigned 
 
Week 12: Medicaid
4/22/26	Learning Objectives:
●	Better understand the following aspects of the Medicaid program:
○	Its origins and its current roles within the health care system and the economy
○	The basics: Population characteristics and eligibility, benefits, administration & financing, and expenditures
○	Medicaid’s link with the Medicare program: The “Dual Eligible” population
○	The ACA’s Medicaid expansion provisions and their impacts
○	Medicaid dynamics during the COVID-19 pandemic
○	Medicaid reform proposals that have been considered by Congress in the past (and that we may see again).

Problem set 5 Due 

Week 14: Medicare
4/29/26	Learning Objectives:
●	Better understand the following aspects of the Medicare program:
○	Its origins and its current roles within the health care system and the economy
○	The basics: Population characteristics and eligibility, and expenditures, the differences across the various program “parts”: Parts A through D, including benefits and funding; and the program’s overall financial stability
○	The differences between “traditional” Medicare and the Medicare Advantage program.
Note: The Kaiser Family Foundation is a great source of information on the Medicare program.
 
Week 15: Final Exam
5/7/26	The exam will be focused primarily on Part III material but may touch on all course content. 
Time: 5:30 to 8:20pm in HSC401


 
 

